---+ Reading about Prolog

This topic is on reading material: books, articles on the web, etc.
providing useful training and background material on Prolog. I started
this topic after seeing this message on comp.lang.prolog:

    Hi, can't say that I'm much better, since I just started myself, but
    take a look at these links:

    * http://kti.mff.cuni.cz/~bartak/prolog/ - Roman Barták
    * https://skolemmachines.org/ThePrologTutorial/ - J R Fischer
    * http://www.amzi.com/AdventureInProlog/ - Dennis Merritt and Amzi! inc.
    * http://www.compapp.dcu.ie/~alex/LOGIC/start.html - James Power and Alex Monaghan
    * http://www.arch.su.edu.au/~jose/prolog/tutorial.html - José Damski
    * http://cs.wwc.edu/~cs_dept/KU/PR/Prolog.html - Anthony Aaby
    * http://www.dcs.qmw.ac.uk/~mmh/AINotes/ - Matthew Muntbach
    * http://www.dcs.kcl.ac.uk/teaching/units/cs2lap/notes.html - Dov Gabbay and Ulle Endriss

Here are some links, if they are helpful, help yourself.

I have myself a book called Programming in Prolog 4th Edition, but many
here in Sweden says that The Art of Prolog is one of the better ones
they have seen.

Personally, I would like to add that if you think you know Prolog, you
have two choices to move on. One is to write a compiler and the other is
to read The Craft of Prolog by Richard O'Keefe.

To help alleviate the enormous frustration that may arise when
struggling with prolog for the first time, I started writing material to
accompany the prolog course at the University of Osnabrück, where I was
a student, late in 1999.

Helmar Gust, who runs the prolog lecture, welcomed the idea and made it
possible that the former "Institut für semantische
Informationsverarbeitung", now the "Insitute for Cognitive Science",
kindly provided funding for this endeavour.

He, Tobias Thelen and Christoph Peylo answered countless questions on
the subject and suggested many improvements. Timo Steffens contributed a
chapter on predicate calculus. Kim Wallum translated the text from
German into much better English.

When I stopped working on the material in 2002, Helmar Gust agreed to
release it under the GNU FDL. This gives anybody the freedom to use and
improve the material.

While the material is used in Osnabrück, only three people from outside
Osnabrück have contacted me with regards to the text since 2002.

By posting this, I intend to make the text more widely available.
Unfortunately, I do not have time to improve the material myself and
thus I am interested in finding a dedicated person to hand the project
over to.

    * [[German version][<buch.ps.zip>]]
    * [[English version][<book.ps.zip>]]
    * [[LaTeX sources][<prolog-text.tgz>]]

While the material is far from being perfect and no doubt contains many
smaller infelicities, I am sure it can serve as a springboard for a
better introduction to prolog.

I would appreciate it if you let me know what you think.

@author Sebastian Kanty
@author Patrick Tschorn
@tbd	Check and restructure
